In 1993, California's legislature voted
to form the California Intercity
High-Speed Rail Commission, formally
starting the process to build a
high-speed railway to connect the
state's major cities. Today, three
decades on and six years past the first
planned completion date, the project is
seven times over budget, now devoid of a
planned completion date, and lacking a
single foot of laid track. But back in
2008, after a decade and a half of
study, California presented a detailed
plan for the railroad to its voters. On
the very same where Californians made
their choice between Obama and McCain,
they also marked their opinion on
whether the state should build America's
first true high-speed rail system. LA to
San Francisco, 2 hours and 40 minutes,
33 to 42 billion dollars, initial
operations by 2020. The voters' answer,
of course, was yes. With 52.6% support,
Prop 1A passed. But then they actually
had to go and build the thing, and this
[music] proved challenging.
The difficulty of building high-speed
rail is that it needs a continuous block
of geographically and geometrically
compatible land. Other railroads
typically run on tracks that follow
routes that have had trains for dozens,
even over a hundred years, but the
geometry of these tracks is too tight.
High-speed trains need long, gentle
curves to maintain their high speeds.
So, much of the work leading up to Prop
1A was determining where, in broad
strokes, it make the most sense to build
these tracks. Through years of debate,
environmental analysis, legal
proceedings, and study, they'd weighed
the tradeoffs and made selections of
which mountain passes, regions, and
cities the railroad should hit. But as
construction started, the planners
started to pay for their decisions. One
of their most difficult was how to leave
Los Angeles. You see, the sprawling
urban area is surrounded on all sides by
massive mountains. After all, it's the
city where one can drive from warm
weather surfing to high altitude skiing
in just an hour or two, traffic
permitting. The stakes of getting the
selection right were high as building
high-speed rail lines through these
seismically active mountains would
inevitably be one of the costliest and
most complicated sections of
engineering, not just of this project,
but of any high-speed rail project ever
attempted worldwide.
After preliminary study, there were
really two serious contenders: Tejon
Pass and the Palmdale alignment. At
first glance, Tejon Pass was the most
obvious. It's where Interstate 5 crosses
the mountains, meaning there's already
road infrastructure to allow for
construction access. There was already
power infrastructure to provide the
backbone of what's needed for electric
trains, [music] and there was already
environmental impact, easing the
environmental review process. Tejon was
also just quite simply the more direct
route. The system had to meet its wildly
ambitious voter-approved 2-hour and
40-minute trip time. It was literally
written into California law following
Prop 1A, meaning missing that target is
a violation of California law. Taking
anything but the Tejon Pass route would
force planners to find those minutes
elsewhere.
That made it surprising when the
California High-Speed Rail Authority
voted for the alternative, the Palmdale
alignment. This was and still is a
massively controversial choice.
Depending on who you ask, this detour
will add between 3 and 12 minutes to the
trip time, a massive penalty that will
drive up spending elsewhere to
compensate. On first glance, this
decision makes little sense, but some
theories have been put forward. Chief
among them, simple political cronyism.
In the early days of planning, there was
an LA County Board of Supervisors member
named Michael Antonovich who represented
the district that included Palmdale. He
believes a routing through Palmdale
would buoy the region both through job
opportunities during construction and
economic development once the train made
it a viable commuter town to LA.
Meanwhile, the Rail Authority's board
included a member named Jerry Epstein
who otherwise was a real estate
developer with major holdings in Marina
del Rey, which operated under a
long-term lease from the county. He was
looking for votes from the Board of
Supervisors to renew this lease, so he
allegedly struck a tit-for-tat deal.
Support from Antonovich for his lease
renewal in exchange for his support for
Antonovich's Palmdale alignment
ambitions. While the board encompassed
nine members, Epstein's influence was
reportedly enough to persuade the rest
to follow their lead. Detractors of the
project use this as example number one
of how corruption has brought California
HSR to its current state. But while this
story almost certainly has has some
truth to it, its frequent
characterization as a the deciding
factor for the Palmdale alignment is a
massive oversimplification of the
decision. You see, the Palmdale
alignment has some legitimate
advantages. To start, the economic
development opportunities that made it
so attractive for Antonovich were real
and could be a positive for the entire
housing crunched region. Unlike almost
everywhere in the LA Basin, where
additional housing stock primarily comes
through densifying, the Antelope Valley
has room to sprawl, the primary way
housing real istically gets built
[music] in the US. It could become an
attractive low-cost commuter town, which
would provide downward pressure on
housing prices for the entire [music]
region. Picking Palmdale also
represented some real foresight. Just as
California's HSR project was in its
planning phases, so too was what is now
known as a Brightline West, a privately
operated high-speed line now in
construction from Vegas to LA. It
started construction long after
California HSR and is expected to finish
far sooner, thanks in part to its
decision to not attempt [music] the hard
part, construction through urban areas.
They cover most of the journey, but stop
short of going to any major population
center in LA, rather terminating on its
outskirts at Rancho Cucamonga station,
about 40 miles or 65 km from downtown
LA. The thinking was that this would be
good enough to be competitive with
flying, since travelers could drive or
take local trains to get to this
station. But if California HSR were to
build through Palmdale, the two lines
could be connected by building a
relatively simple and low-cost 50-mi
[music] 80-km line across the flat open
desert. This would improve both
projects. California HSR trains from the
Bay Area could now run to Las Vegas, and
a likely sub-4-hour run time would still
be reasonably competitive versus air
travel. Brightline West, meanwhile,
would now have a route deeper into LA.
They could use California HSR's tracks
as a means to service LA Union Station,
likely making it a more competitive
service as well. While this
interconnection is not formally in
motion as a project, it's also far from
a pipe dream. In fact, California HSR
and Brightline West made sure that
they'd use compatible signaling systems,
track geometry, and standards to keep
the door open for this [music] ambitious
future.
At the end of the day, though, according
to the Rail Authority at least, cost was
the biggest factor. Once they looked in
detail at what it would actually take to
build each of these options, they
determined that Tejon Pass required
quite a lot of tunneling and earthworks,
leading to a price tag that was not
meaningfully cheaper than the Palmdale
alternative, despite [music] the far
shorter distance. Again, at least
according to their analysis. So, even
with a slightly longer trip time via
Palmdale, the Authority decided that the
development, connection, [music] and
cost-saving opportunities made Palmdale,
on balance, a better route. But plenty
disagree. Plenty call their
decision-making process
>> [music]
>> deeply flawed. You see, the alignment
study through Tejon Pass did not include
it taking the most efficient path
through this Tejon Ranch. Despite its
name, this massive tract of private
land, one of the largest in the state,
is hardly a ranch anymore. Rather, it's
a massive commercial enterprise traded
on the New York Stock Exchange with a
market cap of half a billion dollars,
generating tens of millions of dollars
of annual revenues by exploiting its
land for real estate development and
agriculture. The company is strongly
opposed to Tejon Pass alignment, as this
area is theoretically its highest value
land thanks to the connectivity
Interstate 5 provides. The company has
long had plans for a massive [music]
housing development in the area and a
high-speed rail line running through it
would only negatively affect the
theoretical value of this project. After
all, there never realistically be a stop
to serve such a small population center
and the noise pollution and visual
impact would likely [music] turn buyers
away. Compounding the difficulty, in
order to get approval for this
development, Tejon Ranch struck a deal
with a coalition of environmental groups
to put hundreds of thousands of acres of
its land into conservation status.
>> [music]
>> So, while California HSR does have
eminent domain authority, meaning it
could just take private land regardless
of owners' wishes, doing so would
inevitably set off a lengthy legal
battle both with this well-funded and
politically connected private company
and a coalition of powerful
environmental nonprofits. The state
didn't want to deal with that, so in its
alignment studies it always assumed that
a Tejon Pass alignment would include a
long stretch of tunnels to route around
the proposed development, even if it did
still pass through the ranch's land.
Independent analysis has suggested that
this inflated cost by as much as $6
billion
pushing the estimated price up to
roughly on par with Palmdale. Critics
suggest that the state should have
seriously considered an alignment that
did [music] take the most efficient
route through Tejon Ranch's land and in
doing so, there's every chance they'd
have selected that option given the
likely lower costs and faster trip
times. To this day, there remains a
vigorous debate over this decision and
many suggest that how nonsensical it
looks is, in fact, the most damning
evidence that the real reason behind
Palmdale's selection was, in fact, the
alleged political cronyism.
But after exiting the LA Basin, next the
project is to cross the flat
agricultural lands of the Central
Valley. This is by far the simplest
section of the line, but that doesn't
mean it's simple. There were really two
primary alignment options. One was, once
again, the I-5 corridor. Just as with
Tejon Pass, the fact that there was an
existing right of way was attractive.
The railroad could primarily route in
the median or alongside the highway. Few
bridges would have to be built and
little private land would have to be
acquired. In fact, this is the exact
strategy that Brightline West is using
for its Vegas service. It's building in
the I-15 median, enabling its
theoretical lightning-fast construction
timeline and lower cost.
>> [music]
>> I-5 is also the most direct alignment
for California HSR geographically,
allowing for 11 to 20-minute faster trip
times, once again, depending who you
ask, and was estimated as 5.6% lower in
cost by the High-Speed Rail Authority's
feasibility studies. The alignment was
so attractive, in fact, that France's
national rail operator, SNCF, was
briefly looking at partnering with the
state to build its system under the
condition that they chose this
alignment. But just as with Tejon versus
Palmdale, the more costly option had its
advantages. Particularly, essentially
every major population center in the
Central Valley is on its east side. The
corridor along I-5 is mostly bounded by
small agricultural communities and their
fields, meaning those in cities along
the east side of the Central Valley
would need to drive to pick up the
train, making their travel times longer
and the train less competitive versus
planes. [music] This would then push
down ridership, pushing down revenue,
and making the theoretical economics of
the railway more challenging. But more
importantly, in the eyes of [music] the
early planners, it would make the
politics more challenging. You see, the
constituencies in San Francisco and LA
were the easiest [music] to win over.
They had a lot to gain from the service,
and their left-leaning politics were
generally more compatible with big
public spending for public [music]
transport. Central Valley residents,
meanwhile, were the swing votes. The
rural areas were always going to vote
majority now. The project might be able
to sway some with the promise of jobs
during [music] construction, but the
easiest votes to pick up were those in
the urban areas to the east, like
Bakersfield, Fresno, and Merced. So, to
gain their support, the project had to
provide service to them, pushing it
towards a longer, costlier, and more
complex eastern alignment. Even if low
in density compared to LA or San
Francisco, there are still plenty of
obstacles in the eastern Central Valley.
While there is a state highway through
the area, it didn't make as much sense
to follow it. Its curve radiuses were
designed for 65 mph speeds, [music]
while the train needed gentler turns to
keep its target 220 mph speed, which
was, once again, necessary to meet the
legally mandated 2 hour [music] and 40
minutes timing.
While the railroad could theoretically
leave the highway's right of way during
turns, the amount of building and
infrastructure that had built up around
the highway through time made this
option more costly and complicated than
the alternatives. Too much would have to
get knocked down.
Also available were existing freight
railroads. Union Pacific and BNSF run
through the area, and they had enough
room alongside their existing tracks
[music] to fit more. The High-Speed Rail
Authority started with Union Pacific,
but they outright refused. They likely
viewed high-speed rails as a potential
obstacle to future development of their
capacity constrained, highly valuable
track. It's very possible they'll want
to build a more capacity through the
area in the future, and it'd be a lot
more difficult if there were all sorts
of high-speed rail viaducts and other
structures getting in the way. So, the
High-Speed Rail Authority went to BNSF,
which took a more cooperative approach.
For proper compensation, they were
willing to allow construction parallel
to their right of way. But, while this
acted as a massive shortcut, there were
still obstacles. For example, this,
Colonel Allensworth State Historic
[music] Park. This preserves the only
town in California that was founded and
run by African Americans, and it sits on
the National Register of Historic
Places. Federal law prohibits projects
with any federal funding, which the
railroad would be, from taking land from
sites in such status, so the high-speed
railroad had to deviate around it. That
meant, in this area, they did have to go
through the time-consuming process of
acquiring private land parcel by parcel.
If individual owners and the railroad
could come to an agreement, this was a
relatively straightforward process, but
if not, they'd enter a legal process
that would span 3 to 7 [music] years.
In other sections, the complication was
less so the obstacle, but more so the
solution. The town of Hanford, for
example, did not want the high-speed
rail running through it, even though the
freight railroad already did, and the
Rail Authority wasn't interested in
routing that way anyway, since the tight
geometry of BNSF's right of way would
force slower speeds. So, rather they
built a bypass around the town, but this
[music] turned into a whole saga.
Due to wetlands in the area, they'd have
to go through the US Army Corps of
Engineers and the EPA to get a permit.
The railroad initially preferred an
alignment east of the city, but to
properly evaluate, the federal
regulators forced us to do a feasibility
study on a western alignment. As the
study went on, the planners actually
started to favor the western alignment,
and locals started advocating for it,
too, preferring its lower impact on the
local area. The railroad was thinking
that rather than building a viaduct, as
they planned in the [music] east, they
could bury the tracks in a trench and
route roads, freight rails, and other
existing elements above it. But
eventually, after yet further study, it
became clear that the water table in the
area was uniquely shallow, [music]
10 to 15 ft, rather than the usual 30 to
40. With all the pumping and water
management infrastructure they'd need to
make this work, it was looking more
costly than their original eastern plan,
[music] so they went back to that. This
whole flip-flop cost them about 2 and
1/2 years in planning, but also soured
relations with the community,
contributing to the initiation of a
13-year lawsuit between a local
landowner, the County Board of
Supervisors, and the railroad. At every
step, small decisions led to long
delays.
But the last major routing decision
along the railroad span turned into one
of the most contentious of them all, how
to get into San Francisco.
>> [music]
>> Like LA, the Bay Area surrounded by
mountains on all sides, inevitably
forcing another complicated high-cost
section. After initial exploratory
study, two primary options were
identified, Altamont Pass and Pacheco
Pass. This northeastern route had a lot
of advantages. It would pass through the
growing population centers of Merced and
Modesto, adding potential riders to the
system. It would also follow the
existing rail and Interstate corridor,
once again making things easier through
using an existing right of way and
existing [music] power infrastructure.
But it had a problem, and in the eyes of
the High-Speed Rail Authority, a big
one.
Its northeastern entry to the Bay Area
meant San Francisco, [music] Silicon
Valley, and San Jose could not be served
by the same trains. Rather, they'd have
to split the track into two directions
and either split physical trains in two
after the pass to go the separate
directions, adding to trip times, or run
separate services for San Francisco than
San Jose, reducing service frequencies
for both cities and therefore limiting
the competitiveness of the network. This
pushed the authority towards Pacheco
Pass, and then other benefits stacked on
top of that, like the avoidance of
having to build an expensive new
crossing of the Bay itself, and the
routing through a less developed area.
The decision, however, was massively
controversial with NIMBYs and
environmental groups, setting off a
string of lawsuits which lasted for
years.
>> [music]
>> From top to bottom, from its earliest
days through today, in large ways and
small, the California High-Speed Rail
project has consistently chosen [music]
ambition over practicality. It chose to
run at some of the fastest speeds of any
rail line worldwide. It chose to service
essentially any population center along
its route. [music] It chose to build
through downtowns rather than around
them. It chose to build the absolute
gold standard of high-speed rail
services, but in doing so, might have
flown too close to the sun.
The The presented to the voters in 2008
was just an absolute fantasy. It assumed
costs on par with and a construction
timeline faster than European high-speed
systems, despite a complete lack of
experience in such construction and a
route [music] through seismically active
mountains and dense urban areas. It was
also presented despite a mere fraction
of funding actually secured, and now
with costs estimated as much as seven
times higher, funding has dried up.
That's why right now construction is
only in progress on the Central Valley
segment, the easiest segment to build
serving the least amount of people.
While this project is meaningful,
significant progress has been made, it's
still a small fraction of what's needed
for a full San [music] Francisco to LA
run.
Deep down, planners might have believed
that the fantastical budgeting was a
pragmatic necessity to get voter
approval for an ultimately worthwhile
system, but that decision now makes the
project look like an absolute farce.
While a closer look certainly finds
cases of mismanagement during
construction here and there, the larger
problem is a massive mismatch between
expectations and reality. Despite that,
the perception from a lightly informed
wider audience is that the way this
project has progressed since approval is
emblematic of corruption and
incompetence in state governance, even
though it was the planning phases where
things really went wrong. That
perception is making funding harder to
come by. The federal government is now
outright hostile to the project.
If built fully, the California
high-speed rail system will be one of
the most impressive, most transformative
rail projects ever constructed in the
entire world. [music]
It will be the crown jewel of American
rail infrastructure. But its future is
now in serious jeopardy. This is always
a debate in rail development, perfect
versus good enough. Pragmatism is often
what gets trains running in the 21st
century. It's not the heyday of rail
travel anymore. The economics are
challenging
>> [music]
>> and compromise is what gets it done.
Meanwhile, when perfect happens, it's
perfect, but it often [music]
doesn't.
As we've seen particularly in Asia and
Europe, high-speed rail can have a
transformative effect that improves the
lives of people across a whole region,
but transit accessibility can take
different forms that have similar
effects. Like, what if public transit
was free?
>> [music]
>> That's what Jason from Not Just Bikes
explores in his new series Day Pass
where he travels to Luxembourg, the only
country with completely free public
transportation. He rides every form of
public transit in the country as he
explores what that's like and if it's
worth it. I'd also recommend the other
episodes in the first season where he
goes to Nantes, the birthplace of public
transit, and Copenhagen, one of the best
cities in the world for biking. And this
is just one of plenty of Nebula original
series for transit lovers. There's also
Express where Live rides
trains way further than is sensible from
Europe to Asia and the Arctic to Africa.
And of course, Jetlag where in addition
to getting every episode one week early,
you also have access to the new outtake
channel Lost and Found and the Nebula
exclusive Layover podcast recapping each
episode. And beyond [music] these,
there's an ever-growing catalog of
Nebula original and exclusive content
from hundreds of your favorite
thoughtful digital creators, all ad and
sponsorship free. And not that this is
the single reason you should subscribe,
but it's worth knowing that a
subscription to Nebula helps support
Wendover and all the other independent
creators on the platform, providing us a
stable revenue source that isn't subject
to the ebbs and flows of YouTube views
and ad rates. But what really seals the
deal in my opinion is that the price is
abundantly reasonable, far lower than
basically any other streaming site at
just $6 a month or $60 a year.
>> [music]
>> But if you use my link
nebula.tv/wendover,
you'll get 50% off, meaning the cost
comes down to just $30 a year, breaking
down to a mere $2.50
a month. So, head over there to sign up
today, and if you do, thanks in advance
for your support.